my experience is listening is one of the
deepest ways of affecting your reality
how the caliber the quality of your
listening when you're listening in that
attuned
way like we evolve
quicker all right so one of the first
things that we do in this work is that
we teach people how to
listen and it's also interesting that
it's not just one of the first things
that happens in the world it's also one
of the things that happens in the middle
and later on in some of our more
advanced courses we come straight back
to listening and so we've used the
metaphor of the the sushi rice before to
talk about some of these really basic
kind of 101s that aren't really 101s
they're actually some of the whole
practice that you just get deeper and
deeper on and so I'd love to get deeper
on the topic of listening today how's
that sound yeah that sounds great great
so so let's get into it what in in the
way that we speak about it in this work
what is listening and what is it
not yeah
a so the here's the weird part about
listening is that there's no moment of
awake Consciousness where you're not
listening so you're always listening to
something um maybe you're listening to
the thoughts in your head or maybe
you're listening to the other person or
maybe you're listening to the pain in
your foot but your awareness is always
on something so there's a way in which
you're always listening so there's a
caliber of listening or there's an
attention given to listening that
changes a
lot and so just as a like a very simple
experiment if right now
you uh put all of your attention if
you're listening to this put all of your
attention on your inner ear just like
keep all the focus on your inner ear
there's a way in which you're listening
to the inner ear but there's also a way
in which you still are comprehending
everything that I'm saying even though
your attention is in your inner ear and
that's a very specific quality of
listening do another experiment so
instead of listening you know paying
attention to your inner ear listening to
your inner ear see what it's like to
listen to The
Silence that surrounds my words that's
in between my words or the frequencies
that are silent even when I'm talking if
you put all of your focus on the silence
again you still understand what I'm
saying but the quality of listening has
changed a little
bit when we talk about listening one of
the ways to think about it is we're
actually putting our attention to the
listening we're we're putting our
attention on the listening which is a a
very deep receiving
allowing like it's a it's like it it the
world is coming to you is the feeling of
it if you're really listening and the
other quality of it is that you're
attuning like there's an Attunement that
happens when you listen and it happens
naturally you don't have to tell
yourself to attune if you're deeply
listening to yourself you're attuning to
yourself if you're deeply listening to
another person you're attuning to them
if you're deeply listening to the
sensations in your body you're attuning
to that which means that you're showing
up in a way that there's a lot of care
um
respect um understanding would be some
of the things that come out of that
naturally and so listening is really
important and typically what happens is
when people are listening they bring a c
other qualities to it like I'm listening
so I can figure out what I'm going to
say next or I'm listening to help fix
you or to be of value or to judge you or
to so there's a or judge myself or fix
myself or and the listening gets uh
diluted
by the the attention not just going to
listening but the attention going to how
am I going to interact what am I going
to do next what like how do I feel safe
in this
environment so and so when we're
teaching listening and as you know like
when we
teach like the first thing that happens
if you're interested in coaching with us
at all is this very long long like set
of sessions around
listening um what we're really teaching
is that place where you go where you are
your attention is in the listening and
you're listening to yourself and another
person simultaneously and which is
exactly what vew is pointing to in you
know the connection course yeah as well
we don't talk about listening
specifically there very much it is it is
the same
pointer yeah yeah there's a lot to
unpack from what you just said there's
there's a tuning which kind of makes me
think of tuning in like a radio station
tun like what is it that you're tuning
into to or what is the channel that
you're listening on the inner ears an
interesting one the tension in your feet
also with the the intention are you
listening from a place of preparing to
respond from a place of trying to
remember what like the words that are
being said or the concepts which is a
very different thing from just letting
it land in the body and be you know the
episodic memory of what was said being
lost but the energetics really landing
and being gred
yeah so what what are some things that
you would say would stand in the way of
listening yeah so again there's one way
to think about it which is you're always
listening so nothing can stand in the
way of it and I and I keep on repeating
that
because one of the things that the mind
will do is it'll make listening a to-do
a challenge you have to start trying and
all of that is what gets in the way of
the listening so yeah so I keep on
saying yeah yeah exactly so I keep on
saying it's all there all naturally
because that allows you to find the
listening more easily because it's just
an allowing it's just a receiving
thinking that you have to do something
gets in the way of listening the other
thing that gets in the way of listening
and the most deep way of listening is
thinking that you have to do something
to be valuable
or useful or if you really are listening
you'll what you'll start noticing is
actions arise from the listening mhm as
you instead of from the like oh I need
to be a value oo I'm scared they're
going to get upset at me o I'm right
there's just like this yeah deep
listening the other the other thing that
gets in the way of it is
um going into the future and the past
often gets in the way of listening right
so some way in which you try to manage
the future or have managed the past is
going to management really in any way
gets in the way of of listening yeah I
was going to say everything you just
described sounded like a form of
management listening yeah so that s
something can happen so that I can
respond in a certain way so certain
outcomes
occur listening with an eye towards the
future of the past being seen in a
certain way or being managed to an
outcome yeah like all so so listening
sounds like it's a the way of listening
that we practice is a non-management way
of listening correct and it also creates
a deep presence because it can only
happen right now so which is a state of
presence
so and there's and what's interesting is
that it's at some point as you really
really learn to lessen listen you can
speak about the future from a deep
listening place and you can speak about
the past from a deep listening place um
but you're not managing the future
managing the
past so so that's it and and there's a
quality if you did that experiment about
listening to the silence or listening to
the inner ear or listening to your
body um while I'm speaking you'll notice
that there's a kind of a feeling of
expansion that occurs it's almost like
your awareness becomes bigger and it
becomes more in the Forefront there's
more spaciousness that happens and so
there is a sematic experience that goes
with like a deep listening and so your
body can recognize what when it's
listening in a way that your mind can't
always yeah and that I'd like like to go
a little bit deeper into that because
the way that we're often used to
listening is to listen conceptually
listen intellectually listen to ideas or
content and the way that we're talking
about it right now is listening with the
body listening with the inner ear
listening with awareness and can you
talk a little bit more about how how you
somatically experience listening and
yeah how that changes the quality of a
conversation or the quality of the data
that you that you gather yeah
so on the listening to Concepts piece of
it you know that's what what the Mind
might be noticing but the like the the
prefrontal cortex might be noticing that
but
the we're listening in other ways all
the time as well whether we're conscious
of them or not is another thing meaning
like we might not be listening to the
fact that our body like to constricts
when someone gets angry at us and we
don't want to feel it and so we jump on
social media because that constriction
is like uh I want to go on but our body
there was a listening that happened you
weren't conscious of it that created
that outcome so one of the things that I
noticed is that when people are just
listening to the concepts there's a way
in which they don't grock the rest of it
but when you when you are listening to
The Silence of your body you do grock
the rest of it as it turns out what
interesting about it is you might like
your mind kind of catches up is the
experience the mind is like huh like
you're kind of like just listening and
then all of a sudden you get it instead
of you're getting it getting it getting
it getting it got it so it's more like
the way you would understand a river by
just sitting by the river for a while
and all of a sudden you start noticing
things like oh the Eddies happen on the
side and the flow happens in the middle
and the and there's something that's
happening at different like the water's
moving at different pace underneath and
it is at the top you just stuff you
can't grock any other way but just to be
sitting by a river or like people I know
who rode Rivers for years they
understand a river in a way that a
scientist couldn't they can read the
water and so there's a way that you get
things that the mind has to kind of
catch up with and maybe sometimes
doesn't even understand like the way a
basketball player might know how to do
fake without fully intellectualizing it
but they know that when they move that
little shoulder before they turn left
that they always get around the guard or
whatnot so yeah so there's that aspect
of it um I noticed that I can listen
from a place of awareness and wholeness
and silence and I I never have a problem
grocking information that's being handed
to me or I I do but not any more than if
I'm fully in my head listening it just
it's just that it requires me not to
worry if I'm getting
it if I worry if I'm getting it then I'm
screwed so it just requires like it's
almost like a trust it's a trust until
it's not it's like I know that this will
happen and then it's
like it's like it's like oh will the ice
be cold I have to trust that the ice is
cold and at some point you're like ice
is cold I don't need to trust that and
but there is that process of learning to
trust right and in some Cas that ice
might the ice for me sometimes feels
like the the sense of knowing like if
I'm if I'm listening to you right now
from the sense of like oh I know what
we're talking about we've been doing a
lot of listening together then all of
your words get filtered through my
preconception of what I think you're
talking about and that's a pretty harsh
filter and without that filter if I'm if
I'm sitting in the unknown I have no
idea what was about to say in fact your
the internet just cut out a minute ago
and I couldn't hear about 15 seconds of
what you said but I was like practice
thing that just like being with it and
listening and when you came back I just
felt the energy in your voice and I was
here's where we are and then was able to
continue much much more than like oh
I'm lost I didn't hear the past 15
seconds yeah yeah yeah it does the same
thing with oh I have to get this too so
you're saying listening through the
filter of knowing which is kind of
living in the past I know this thing it
will filter out what you hear living in
the idea oh I have to get this will also
filter out what you hear right and so in
a weird way the deeper forms of
listening have less filters on them or
the filters are more natural is a way to
express it where it's just like oh look
at like my experien is the The Wider
forms of listening the listening that
are like embodied
listening what it does is it's like the
important information comes to the
surface
easily yeah more easily the signal to
noise ratio gets better
but it you have to experiment with that
you can't ever trust that that's just
like a thing that you do enough and then
you're like oh wow that works it's
can it be that easy yes it's that easy
yeah yeah so given that so much of what
we've talked about with listening is
about filtering we're like talking about
like what is being filtered what's not
being
filtered uh and it might be in relation
to to a person how does that work with
your reality what how does listening the
listening affect your reality filter
your
reality tremendously it's like it's an
interesting thing because I see so many
people worried about what they're going
to say what they're going to do how
they're going to do it who's going to
see it how the people think about them
blah blah blah blah blah and it's all
about like their capacity to penetrate
somebody
else um like influence and affect other
people and what's fascinating to me is
that my experien is listening is one of
the deepest ways of affecting your
reality how the caliber the quality of
your
listening it affects what people are
going to say to you it affects um the
information that you're going to gather
but if let's say you're doing business
and your quality of listening is going
to affect how good your product is it's
going to affect how happy your customers
are it's going to affect how how much
your um employees are happy how much
they feel heard like it has a tremendous
effect on your reality and that's just
the
external internally when you're
listening and you're listening in that
ATT tuned way this is externally as well
but internally when you're listening in
that ATT tuned
way like we evolve quicker like it's
like there's an there's just something
that happens where it's like the things
that need to come to the surface come to
the surface like there's a respect
there's an Attunement just like if
you're if a child is deeply attuned to
as a kid they just develop holistically
quicker better and so it's the same with
ourselves it's like in a weird way you
can say meditation is a listening of on
and and obviously a lot of people do it
in a way to manage themselves which
isn't a listening but at some point in
your meditation you you come across the
idea that it's like oh it's
non-management it's all just listening
and and you'll just notice the
development happen so it it influences
not just what comes to you in the
world the quality of
people the the kinds of information the
way people interact with you like if you
think in your
life who is the people in my life who
listen the best and like here's what you
probably don't feel like what an
you know like you're like oh that I love
that person they listen to me well like
they're a good listener yeah um
and so so you influence how people show
up who shows up what information you get
and you you unfold quicker the more that
your your capacity to listen to and the
people around you unfold quicker yeah
what you just said about how listening
really well is also listening to
yourself and like meditation essentially
forms of it can be listening to yourself
really ties together a couple of things
we've been talking about here because
when we've said that you can listen from
your body there's also a way that what
that is is that you're listening to the
way your body's responding to what's
being said and so your body's as you
said earlier you're always listening but
you know there there's a phenomenon that
we've talked about where sometimes
somebody will say something completely
illogical but they'll say it with
conviction yeah you see this all over
the world right now they'll say it with
conviction and people will believe the
content because what they're actually
picking up is a conv
and so it's like there's a way that the
body responds to conviction in a way
that might for some people feel like
safety might be like okay yeah I can
trust this there's conviction here and
they're not recognizing unless you're
listening to your body to the extent
where you're like oh I noticed that
there's something about the way this
person's speaking that makes me feel
safe and it doesn't seem related to the
content and I can separate that out and
be
like
maybe maybe it's not actually the the
words that I'm hearing that are that I'm
responding to right now yeah so yeah
that's an really interesting point about
listening generally like one of the
things that's important in our teaching
about listening is that it you don't put
yourself entirely in the other person if
you put yourself entirely in the other
person it's it's not really listening
like that's like you know like there's
almost like a trying to influence trying
to make sure that they feel safe trying
to make sure that you know like they're
cared for intended to and which is
another form of management it like the
deeper forms of listening you're always
have some percentage of your awareness
in yourself mhm um which is an
incredibly useful thing like you said
with oh I'm I'm feeling their conviction
not the intelligence of what they're
saying but also I notic that people who
are who are good at listening to
themselves they're less likely to fall
for the con they're less likely
to um ignore you know the boyfriend
who's going to turn abusive they're less
likely to run away from themselves um
abandon themselves to make somebody else
happy etc etc like because the
information you're getting isn't just
from the head the information you're
getting is how your body's reacting yeah
how is my heart get that mirror and and
you get the mirror of that yeah yeah
yeah how how is my heart responding to
this someone saying things that sound
nice to me or giving me approval but
what why is my gut feeling the way it's
feeling right now yeah yeah exactly yeah
so yeah listening has always got a a
there's an aspect of attention in your
own body to it if you're listening in
that very in a deep way it's interesting
because it's you that's a little bit
counterintuitive like oh if I'm
listening to you I'm fully in you but
it's that's more management and chasing
you than it is being right or or even
the the notion that if I'm listening to
you I'll remember all of the factual
things that you said
which you know like I may be getting
more facts the facts might be more about
like that might be more inclusive of my
response to you and how my all the
different intelligences in my system are
hearing what you're saying and so
there's there's sometimes a a bit of a
paradox or kind of something
counterintuitive where I might come away
from a conversation this especially
happens in coaching sessions where the
the details just go right in and out but
something much deeper lands and stays
and then is then a part of the
relationship it's become more like both
parties can become more aware of
whatever that is that doesn't have words
yeah and there can be more connection
with less episodic memory and content
being
remembered yeah a and there's something
else that happens
like you'll know like you know this so
when we're doing like an inperson
retreat we really ask people not to take
notes um and we try to take any notes in
the important notes in advance for them
um because though they might get it more
in their head they don't get it in their
whole body and so trying to remember
information often makes
it that you grow that you get it you
understand it intellectually but you
don't understand it in your
body
yeah yeah yeah and that brings me to
another another question here is a lot
of what we've been talking about with
listening is on the receiving side when
someone else is speaking and that might
create the idea that you stop listening
to speak or ask a question but as we've
been saying you you're always listening
so how how uh what's your sense of how
listening continues while speaking and
asking a question and I asked that from
the sensation in my body as the question
comes through I'm in in that practice
exactly going to say you it's funny to
watch you have a question that you're
actually doing um but yeah great
question
um I notice that when I'm listening and
talking when I'm in that deep form of
listening I'm talking at the same time
I'm very curious about what the
going to come out of my
mouth it's like it's like I'm
experiencing it for the first
time it's like it's an unfolding that
Delights me the way like why
[Music]
say is like if you're listening to this
there somebody might be like making this
into a rule or morality or something and
I would
say watch out for that like listen like
listen listen if you listen to your body
if you listen to to awareness if you
listen to listening notice how it thinks
about making a rule or making it a
morality or making it something that you
have to
do it's um it almost feels like when you
have to do it it's the opposite of doing
it you know so I just I just want to put
that warning out there for people like
somebody's going to listen okay now once
I listen right I'll be blah blah blah
blah like it's much more of a like oh
what a joy what a joy it is to listen
like this yeah yeah yeah I'm I'm also
curious to talk about uh listening in
business yeah what happens if someone's
listening in a board meeting listening
in a sales meeting listening yeah to a
customer well let's talk about what
happens when you don't
listen people don't feel heard people
feel pissed off there's a lot more power
struggles inefficiency
abounds um everybody's fighting to be
heard or decided they can't be heard you
don't get the best
ideas um if you look at say like the
Aristotle project that Google did and
one of the things they saw was that
really functional teams were on where
everybody felt really comfortable
speaking and contrary opinions were
comfortable and that there was actually
everybody's voice was heard that the
relevant voices were heard to the
problem that only happens if people feel
listened to um that doesn't happen any
other way uh so more functional
teams um less likely to get duped in a
deal more likely to get a deal done
because for
instance
um when when um I noticed that like when
we were interviewing CEOs as a venture
capitalist I always knew who would get
picked and they were the people who were
asking a bunch of questions so the ones
who asked questions and then listened
were the ones to get the job the ones
who were answering questions usually
were not the ones to get the job um if
you listen to what a venture capitalist
wants to hear before you tell them it's
probably better if you listen to what
the customer wants before you pitch them
it's probably better so listening
basically is one of the most profound
ways to make your business accelerate
quicker than you know coming up with an
idea I got an idea and I'm going to go
present it and see what happens it's
like that's not bad especially if then
you listen and see what happens and
change because you've been listening but
like the iteration even if you're in a
high iteration listening is half of the
iterative process so listening is just
critical and and and unfortunately not
what a lot of leaders do some leaders
are great at it many of them aren't and
when I see leaders who
are like not just successful but have a
certain level of Peace in them they're
all really good lesson they're all
really good
listeners
and they do things like if they're
senior they're the last person to speak
in a meeting like there if a decision
gets made at most Junior persons starts
because they know their opinion is going
to influence other folks um they're just
really good listeners because they they
know that there's intelligence
everywhere yeah and and that they can
they can learn to mine it if they listen
yeah and now now of course in in the
context of leadership I can I can
imagine people having the question of
like this sounds pretty passive if
you're going to run meetings and
everyone gets to speak in all of the
meetings are you ever going to get
anything done and it brings back the
question of filtering so there's you
know there's a way that you know you
might be sitting with somebody and
you're like I'm just going to listen to
whatever you have to say for the next
hour I don't need to change or filter
that I'm just here with you and then
there's times where you're like we've
got one hour to decide the direction for
the business with a bunch of
stakeholders with disagreements and so
how does listening come in in that way
in in say leadership or you know
sometimes in your in coaching sessions
where
there's you know there's times where
we'll cut people off in the mids
sentence because we're really listening
on a different level and have another
question that just comes through so how
does that interplay work with listening
from what might be perceived as a
passive listening place to listening in
such a way that's like deeply engaging
and filtering in real time with a with a
group for example yeah I mean I thought
I thought about we just did a
perspective of the decision course and
you were there obviously and and um we
all had very different ideas of what
needed to change in that course and we
like if like I think in most companies
it would have been like ended in
disagreement and some sort of power
struggle and blah blah blah blah and we
all came in with very different
opinions everybody spoke their opinion
everybody said what was important to
them and we all walked away going oh
that felt great and we what to do and we
all felt good about what was going to
happen next
and you might not have seen it might not
have seemed like anybody was listening
but everybody con like deeply considered
what was being said saw the truth in it
in whatever was being said and that's
what allowed that movement to happen it
was like I could say to somebody ho whoa
you just like came down so hard on that
it might stop people from presenting
other information oh yeah yeah yeah okay
yeah that's not what I meant okay you
know it was like that kind of thing was
happening all over the
call and and wait wait what did you mean
there okay how did that how did that oh
yeah okay I see how that connects to my
thought over here and that's what was
happening and that comes from the
listening so the the listening like you
said and I said listening is always
happening whether you're talking or not
whether you're taking AC or not there's
not a time when you stop listening the
question is are you in that state of
like whole body present listening for
lack of better words or while you're
talking while you're doing yeah and and
I noticed there there was a Structure to
the meeting that made it
feel like I could just listen to like to
where the whatever point we were in the
meeting there were certain things that
were being discussed in a certain format
and so that there's a there's a way that
having structure in a conversation or
you know a coaching session or in a in a
meeting can create more spaciousness for
listening in certain ways and and also
sometimes it's best just to have no
structure like if your kid's having a
tantrum you're not like okay now we're
going to do this phase of the Tantrum
and then we're going to do the solutions
phase like or I don't know maybe you do
but um but how how do you see that
structure playing into
listening yeah yeah I we we just did a
um brainstorming session and that was
kind of like a group listening so we
were doing we're starting the YouTube
channel and we were thinking about like
how to do teaching videos and Mark and
cat came over to the house and we had a
whole bunch of to do and we just
kind of sat around and had breakfast and
wandered and talked and exchanged ideas
and we're like little anxiety of like oh
are we going to get anything done
and all of a sudden pop the thing showed
up and we were like oh there it is and
we had like the most fun day of and I I
believe that the I just saw some of the
first uh products of that like of that
brainstorming session and and I'm like
wow this this is so much better um than
what we were doing before and and that
came from like a listening of no action
isn't right right now even though we
have a time crunch what is it that we're
and we were all kind of listening
together together for that for that
creative thing and so when you see these
big companies lose their creativity
we're not creating new anymore
we're just refining stuff it's because
there isn't that spaciousness to
actually like listen for it wait for it
to come and then follow it yeah it's
like like I said it's like a it feels
like a
channeling yeah yeah once once there's
an identity like once the company or the
team has an identity this is what we are
this is Who We Are this is how we do it
there's ways that that can provide a lot
of structure and Direction and there's
also ways that that can add a whole new
layer of
filters yes to the listen exactly yeah
yeah and some filters are great in a
company like you have you want to stay
on brand and you want to make sure that
like you're serving your clients and
those kind of things and those filters
are great and there's just like a
waiting for it instead of uh forcing it
instead of a management there's just a
I know it's going to come I'm going to
trust just like you would talking from a
place of listening yeah yeah so now I
want to flip this around a little bit
people may be listening to this and
they're like oh yeah listening is great
I love it when people listen to me how
do I get everybody in my life to listen
better you don't stop it stop stop it
stop stop stop
it uh if you really want everybody in
your life to start listening to you
better start listening better that was
that's like the best possible way to do
it and
um concerning yourself with the way I'd
say it this way is if you concern
yourself with how people are listening
to you then you are not listening to
yourself and you're not listening to
them and it's not within your control
and the more you do it the more you try
to get someone to listen to you the less
the more controlled they feel and the
less likely they are to listen to you
so if you if you really want people to
listen to you then I would say listen
just become a great listener and then a
it doesn't matter if they listen to you
and B they're more likely to listen to
you because what we really want is to
listen to ourselves if we're listening
to ourselves what other people do
doesn't matter so much
mhm yeah we will be able to trust that
we navigate that world however is best
for us exactly exactly
yeah awesome yeah wow what a fun
conversation thank you br yeah I enjoyed
it it had a extra spacious quality to it
it did I think we were
both listening deeply as we were having
the conversation that was fun yeah
that's cool thank you Joe and thank you
everybody for listening yeah thank you
all right take
care